.TH "lograptor-apps" "5" "0.8" "Davide Brunato" "Applications/System"

.SH NAME
\fBlograptor-apps\fR \- Application configuration for Lograptor.



.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBLograptor\fR uses rules for searching and producing
analysis reports on strings in syslog format. The rules are
defined in a configuration file for each application.
This manual explains what is the format of these configuration files.



.SH "CONFIGURATION FILES"
The configuration files of the applications are placed in the subdirectory
\fBconf.d\fR of cfgdir specified in lograptor.conf. The name of a configuration 
file matches the name of the application to configure, with the addition of 
the suffix .conf. 
The most common location for the conf.d directory is in /etc/lograptor/conf.d.

The correspondence between the name of the application and the name of the 
configuration file allows an unambiguous correspondence. 
Anyway the configuration file MUST have the suffix .conf to be recognized 
by the program.


The configuration file of an application is divided in two mandatory sections
, called [main] and [rules], and optional sections.
The optional sections relate to the composition of the report and must have 
distinct names between their and different from those of fixed sections.


.SH "[main] - MAIN SECTION"
This section specifies the general parameters for the application.
These options are defined in this section:
.TP
.B desc
The description of the application. Currently, however, is not used in the report
and has a purpose of simple reference in the configuration.

.TP
.B files
List of log files for the application. You can specify
multiple entries separated by commas. Lograptor manages the replacement
of environment variables of the program, using those regarding
the main configuration file.
Typically, you specify the configuration variable $ logdir (or
$ {logdir}) to shorten the paths that have the same common root.
You can also use other variables related to
program options, such as $ hostname, linked to the option
-H/--host. 

On filenames, you can use wildcard characters typical of
command line, in order to include also the log file
rotated periodically. You can also use variable strings related
to dates:

.RS
.TP
.B %Y
specifies the year
.TP
.B %m
specifies the month as a number with 2 digits (01..12)
.TP
%d
specifies the day with 2 digits (01..)
.RE

.RS
Currently, only these formats are supported to specify the dates, 
but others will be included in future versions.
Filenames that include variables related to dates are expanded by 
the program according to the date range required (options --last or --date).

.RE
.TP
.B enabled
It can be either "yes" or "no." If "no", the program ignores the log. 
If the application is invoked explicitly using the option -a/--app 
then the value of this parameter is ignored. 
This allows you to schedule reports with a favorite set of applications 
and still be able to use the program for analyze logs of an application 
normally off.
.TP
.B priority
It's an unsigned integer that indicates the priority of the application. commonly
is a value from 0 to 10. Lower values indicate higher priority
in the composition of the final report, ie report elements
produced by the application will appear before those of other applications. 
The priority also relates to the processing order of log files.


.SH "[rules] - PATTERN RULES"

This section contains regular expressions, written according to the syntax
module \fBre\fR of Python, that are used by the program to perform the 
analysis of log lines.
Each option defined in this section must have value as a regular expression 
contained in double quotes.
The rules can contain substitution variables for filters of Lograptor.

.TP
.B Using of symbolic groups
Addition to complying with the regular expression syntax, rules are
required to use symbolic groups symbolic for the analysis of log lines.
In the following example of a rule:

   SMTPD_Warning = ": warning: (?P<reason>.+)"

"SMTPD_Warning" is the name of the rule. The name is just an internal reference
in the configuration of the application and so you can choose it as you want.

The string enclosed in double quotes is the search pattern
and "reason" is the symbolic group of the rule. 
The pattern must contain at least one symbol (? P <name> ...) to be accepted 
by the program.
You can specify multiple symbolic groups:

   Mail_Client = ": (?P<thread>[A-Z,0-9]{9,14}): client=(?P<client>${client})"

The symbolic groups defined for each rule are used to create tuples from the 
dictionary index which contains the results.
The symbolic group "\ fBthread \ fR" is reserved for the management of 
multi-line matching.
For this reason, this group is not used in the tuples of the results and
is not considered in the syntax check of rules.

.TP
.B Variable substitution for filters
When the the program is executed, before proceeding with the compilation of 
patterns of rules, a substitution of environment variables is performed, 
but only for variables related to Lograptor's filters.
The groups symbolic connected to the filters of Lograptor are characterized by
following variables:

.RS
.TP
.B user
filter that specifies a pattern for the username
.TP
.B from
filter that specifies a pattern for the sender address
.TP
.B rcpt
filter that specifies a pattern for the recipient address
.TP
.B client
filter that specifies a pattern for the name or the ip address of the client host
.RE

.RS
The variables related to the filters, which are always inserted using
the syntax $VARNAME/${VARNAME}, must have regular expressions as values. 
However, if a filter is not specified in the options, it will use a 
default pattern. 
The default pattern is designed to analyze all the syntax compatible 
to the type of filter. 
For example, the filter "from" for default has a default pattern that 
matches  RFC 822 addresses.
If necessary, you can change these defaults with options of the section
\fB[patterns]\fR of the main configuration file.

Generally, the variables related to filters are included within
a symbolic group to permit the extraction of results.
.RE

.TP
.B Dictionary of results
Each rule produces a table of results. This table is a
Python dictionary. The keys of the dictionary are tuples, while the values
are integers that indicate the number of events associated with the tuple.
For example with the following rule:

   Mail_Received = ": (?P<thread>[A-Z,0-9]{9,14}): from=<(?P<from>${from})>, size=(?P<size>\d+)"

a tuple key will consists of three elements, positionally related to
fields <hostname>, <from> and <size>.
A tuple may be, for example:
    
   (smtp-server.example.com, postmaster@example.com, 4827)

In this case it is likely that the dictionary built with these tuples has 
a number of elements slightly less than the total number of e-mails 
received in the period, since the last value will almost always be different.
Anyway, if you don't need informations about size of email messages, you 
can reduce the complexity with a cut of the rule:

   Mail_Received = ": (?P<thread>[A-Z,0-9]{9,14}): from=<(?P<from>${from})>"

or with the elimination of unused symbolic groups:

   Mail_Received = ": (?P<thread>[A-Z,0-9]{9,14}): from=<(?P<from>${from})>, size=(\d+)"
    
Conversely, the rule can also be expanded to include additional symbolic groups:

   Mail_Received = ": (?P<thread>[A-Z,0-9]{9,14}): from=<(?P<from>${from})>, size=(?P<size>\d+), nrcpt=(?P<mult>\d+)"

.TP
.B Order of pattern rules
The sequence of the rules in the configuration also determines
the order of execution during the process of log analysis.
Anyway are ignored by the program the rules which are not used for the
report and not containing filters passed with an option.
The order and the minimization of the rules used by the process
are important to reduce processing time.
Generally it is better to put first the rules corresponding to more 
numerous log lines.
All the rules defined for the application are used when you need 
to build a report that contains the log lines not recognized (unparsed).

.TP
.B Constraints on pattern rule names
For the rules you should not use names already used by other options
of the program, in order to avoid ambiguity or incompatibility.
In particular, do not use names used by the options belonging to 
sections defining the elements of the report, that are "subreport", 
"title", "color" and "function". 
Finally, it is good practice to avoid calling application rules
with similar names, differentiating with sequential numbers, as 
this may cause ambiguity in the definition of report data items.


.SH "SECTIONS RELATED TO REPORT BUILDING"
These optional sections defines the elements for composing the report. 
For brevity we will refer to these sections as "report sections".
These sections have some fixed options and one or more
options related to the pattern rules 
(ie the options defined in section [rules]).
The options related to the rules will be referred  as "report rules".

.TP
.B Fixed options
The fixed options are four, three of which are mandatory:

.RS
.TP
.B subreport
Indicates in which subreport insert the element. It must be the name of one
of the subreports specified in the main configuration file.
.TP
.B title
Header to be included in the report.
.TP
.B color
Alternative color for the header (names defined in the specifications of HTML and CSS).
It's the only fixed option not mandatory.
.TP
.B function
Function to be applied on results extracted from the pattern rules of the application.
There are 3 different functions definable, each one for a different representation of results:

.RS
.TP
.B total(), total
A function that allows you to create lists with total values from the results.

.TP
.B top(<num>, <header>) 
A function that allows you to create a ranking of maximum values. 
The <num> parameter is a positive integer that indicating how many maximum values 
to be taken into account. 
The third parameter is a description for the field, which will appear
in the report on the right column of the table.

.TP
.B table(<header 1>, .. <header K>)
A function that allows you to create a table from a result set.
The parameters are the descriptions that have to be included in the 
headers of the table. 
The number of descriptions determines the number of columns of the table. 
Report tables, also when generated from logs of different applications,
can be compacted into a single table under specific conditions.
See for this the section \fICOMPACTING TABLES\fR.
.RE

.RE

.TP
.B Report rules

The remaining options of a report section must all be report rules.
These options must be named identical to one of the pattern rules defined in 
the  section [rules] of the configuration.
If you need to refer twice to a pattern rule in the same section you can use 
a numeric suffix for differentiate the options names.
The order of options is important because it is maintained in composition 
of the report.
The syntax of the value of a report rule depends by the function type 
specified in the "function" option.

.RS
.B "FUNCTION 'total'"
.RS

In case of function \fBtotal\fR the syntax of a report rule is:

   <report_rule> = (<filter>, "<description>"[:<counter_field>])

The parameter <filter> can have the following values:

.RS
.TP
.B *
Computes the total on all results.

.TP
.B <field>=<pattern>
Considers only the tuples of results for which the specified field satisfies the
constraint described by the pattern. 
The value <field> must be the name of a symbolic group present in all the
report rules specified below for the section.
.TP
.B <field>!=<pattern>
Consider only the results that do not satisfy the constraint specified by the pattern.
The value <field> must be the name of a symbolic group present in all the
report rules specified below for the section.
.RE

The description is associated to the corresponding value in the list, and it will
joined to it in the report.

The \fB<counter_field>\fR is optional. This parameter is used to calculate
the total value not with the event counter but from a numeric field of results.
By default, the count is done on the value associated with the tuple-key of 
the dictionary of results, ie the number of events extracted  for the particular 
combination of values.
Specifying a <counter_field> the computation can be performed on the values of
the tuple's component associated with the field.
You must be sure that <counter_field> component take only numeric values, 
otherwise it will generate a configuration error and consequently 
the termination of the process.

The name of the numeric field may be preceded by a "+", in which case the total 
sum is calculated with values obtained from product of the field with the number 
of events.
For example, having the pattern rule:

   Mail_Received = ": (?P<thread>[A-Z,0-9]{9,14}): from=<(?P<from>${from})>, size=(?P<size>\d+)"

and defining a report rule:

   Mail_Received = (*, "Total Messages Processed")

you will produce a report that contains the count of total messages received.
Instead using the following option:

   Mail_Received = (*, "Total Transferred Size":+size)

a count of the total number of bytes received will be made.
Finally, joined with field for the count you may specify a memory measurement 
unit to properly understand the value:

   Mail_Received = (*, "Total Transferred Size":+size[B])

At now the measurement units admitted are only the ones used for the memory:

.RS
.TP
\fBb\fR or \fBbits\fR
.TP
\fBB\fR or \fBByte\fR
.RE

with prefixes K, M, G, T for multiples. The value is calculated according to the 
JEDEC specification, ie 1Kbit = 1024 bits. The numerical results in bytes and 
bits are then normalized to the multiple unit best suited for presentation 
in the report.
.RE
.RE

.RS
.B "FUNCTION 'top'"
.RS

In case of function \fBtop\fR the syntax of a report rule is:

   <report_rule> = (<filter>, <field>[:<counter_field>])

The <filter> parameter has the same syntax and effect as that of the report rules
of function "total".
The <field> parameter can be "hostname" or one of the symbolic groups belonging 
to the pattern rule associated, with the exclusion of value "thread" that is reserved.
For example, having this pattern rule:

   Mail_Received = ": (?P<thread>[A-Z,0-9]{9,14}): from=<(?P<from>${from})>, size=(?P<size>\d+)"

you can define a report rule to create the list of servers that have sent more mail:

   Mail_Received = (*, hostname)

Instead, with the following report rule:

   Mail_Received = (*, from)

you create the ranking of email accounts that have sent more messages.
As in the case of "total", you can specify a <counter_field> for counting
alternative values. 
For example with this report rule:

   Mail_Received = (*, from:size[B])

you obtain the ranking of the largest e-mails sent during the period:
Instead, inserting the prefix "+":

   Mail_Received = (*, from:+size[B])

the program computes the list of senders that have high traffic during 
the period.
.RE
.RE

.RS
.B "FUNCTION 'table'"
.RS
In case of function \fBtable\fR the syntax of a report rule is:

   <report_rule> = (<filter>, <field>, ... <field>)

The <filter> parameter has the same syntax and effect as that of the report rules
of functions "total" and "top".
The <field> parameters can be strings enclosed in double quotes, 
or "hostname" (without quotes) or the name of a symbolic group 
belonging to the associated pattern rule, always with the exception 
of the symbolic group "thread".

The number of parameters cannot be less than the number of columns 
of the table, as defined by the number of <header> fields in the option 
"function".
When the number of parameters of the report rule is greater than 
the number of columns of the table, the program collapses the remaining 
values in the last column of the table, forming a comma-separated list.

If <field> is a string enclosed between double quotes it will be used 
as fixed value in the corresponding column, to decorate the data and 
distinguish results from those extracted by other rules or other 
applications.
The first <field> parameter is the one used for sorting the table and
so it ought to be always a reference to a symbolic group and not a string.

When multiple report rules are provided the results are merged in a 
single table, so use multiple report rule in the same report section 
only when these have sense.
.RE
.RE

.TP
.B "COMPACTING TABLES"
It's possible to merge tables produced from logs of different 
applications when the tables belong to the same subreport. 
The program decides autonomously to merge two tables 
if there is an exact matching between titles and headers. 
The correspondence of the headers is performed on names, number and position.

This feature is useful for example if you want to produce a single 
table with all user logins. The result is a smaller and readable report.


.SH "COMMENTS"
Lines starting with "#" will be considered commented out.


.SH "AUTHORS"
.LP
Davide Brunato <brunato@sissa.it>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP 
lograptor(8), lograptor.conf(5), lograptor-examples(8)
