.TH "lograptor.conf" "5" "1.0" "Davide Brunato" "Applications/System"

.SH NAME
\fBlograptor.conf\fR \- lograptor configuration

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBlograptor\fR config file is a simple plaintext file in win.ini style
format.

.SH "Location"
Lograptor will look in /etc/lograptor/lograptor.conf by default, but you can
override that by passing \--conf switch on the command line.

.SH "[main]"
.TP
.B cfgdir
This is where lograptor should look for other configuration information,
most notably, \fBconf.d\fR directory. See \fIlograptor-apps(5)\fR
for more info.
.TP
.B logdir
Where the system logs are located. Useful to shortening log path 
specification in application's configuration files.
.TP
.B tmpdir
Where to create temporary directories and put temporary files. Note
that log files can grow VERY big and lograptor might need similar
space for processing purposes. Make sure there is no danger
of filling up that partition. A good place on a designated loghost is
/var/tmp, since that is usually a separate partition dedicated
entirely for logs.
.TP
.B pidfile 
Location of pidfile (default: /var/run/lograptor.pid) that is created when
lograptor is called with --cron parameter. This is useful to avoid multiple
runs.
.TP
.B fromaddr
Use a specific sender address when sending reports or notifications. 
Defaults to address '\fBroot@<FQDN of the host>\fR'.
.TP
.B smtpserv
Use this smtp server when sending notifications. Can be either a
hostname or a path to sendmail. Defaults to "/usr/sbin/sendmail -t".

.SH "[pattern]"
All the patterns are commented because is wrapped in the configuration code. 
It is possible to customize uncommenting and modifying the patterns, but 
at your risk that the pattern doesn't match properly yet. 
This is useful to include in match non-ortodox log elements or if you want to
simplify the patterns to slightly speed-up the processing.  
.TP
.B rfc3164_pattern
This is the path for legacy BSD log header searches, compliant to RFC 3164 specifications.
.TP
.B rfc5424_pattern
This is the path for IETF log header searches, compliant to RFC 5424 specifications.
.TP
.B ipaddr_pattern
This is the pattern for IP addresses matching.
.TP
.B dnsname_pattern
This is the pattern for DNS names matching.
.TP
.B email_pattern
This is the pattern for RFC824 e-mail address matching.
.TP
.B username_pattern
This is the pattern for username matching.

.SH "[report]"
.TP
.B title
What should be the title of the report. For mailed reports, this is
the subject of the message. For the ones published on the web, this is
the title of the page (as in <title></title>) for html reports, or the
main header for plain text reports.
.TP
.B html_template
Which template should be used for the final html reports. See the
source of the default template for the format used.
.B text_template
Which template should be used for the final plain text reports. See the
source of the default template for the format used.

.TP
.B publishers
Lists the publishers to use. The value is the name of the section
where to look for the publisher configuration. E.g.:
.br
.B publishers = nfspub
.br
will look for a section called "[nfspub]" for publisher
initialization. The name of the publisher has nothing to do with the
method it uses for publishing. The fact that the default are named
[file] and [mail] is only a matter of convenience. List multiple
values separated by a comma.

.TP
.B include_unparsed
Can be either "yes" or "no". If "yes" is specified, strings that didn't
match any of the modules will be appended to the report. Usable for
application calibration and pattern rule debugging.

.TP
.B max_unparsed
Maximum unparsed lines to consider (default is 1000). Reached the limit the
unparsed logs are no more collected. This avoid an excessive growth of
the final report.


.SH "Mail Publisher"
.TP
.B method
Method must be set to "mail" for this publisher to be considered a
mail publisher.
.TP
.B smtpserv
Can be either a hostname of an SMTP server to use, or the location of
a sendmail binary. If the value starts with a "/" it will be
considered a path. E.g. valid entries:
.br
.B smtpserv = mail.example.com
.br
.B smtpserv = /usr/sbin/sendmail -t
.TP
.B mailto
The list of email addresses where to mail the report. Separate
multiple entries by a comma. If ommitted, "root@localhost" will be
used.
.TP
.B format
Can be one of the following: \fBhtml\fR, \fBplain\fR, or \fBboth\fR. If
you use a mail client that doesn't support html mail, then you better
use "plain" or "both", though you will miss out on visual cueing that
lograptor uses to notify of important events.
.TP
.B include_rawlogs
Whether to include the gzipped raw logs with the message. If set to
"yes", it will attach the file with all processed logs with the
message. If you use a file publisher in addition to the mail
publisher, this may be a tad too paranoid.
.TP
.B rawlogs_limit
If the size of rawlogs.gz is more than this setting (in kilobytes),
then raw logs will not be attached. Useful if you have a 50Mb log and
check your mail over a slow uplink.
.TP
.B gpg_encrypt
Logs routinely contain sensitive information, so you may want to
encrypt the email report to ensure that nobody can read it other than
designated administrators. Set to "yes" to enable gpg-encryption of the
mail report. You will need to install mygpgme (installed by default on
all yum-managed systems).
.TP
.B gpg_keyringdir
If you don't want to use the default keyring (usually /root/.gnupg), you
can set up a separate keyring directory for lograptor's use. E.g.:
.br
> mkdir -m 0700 /etc/lograptor/gpg
.TP
.B gpg_recipients
List of PGP key id's to use when encrypting the report. The keys must be in
the pubring specified in gpg_keyringdir. If this option is omitted, lograptor 
will encrypt to all keys found in the pubring. To add a public key to a
keyring, you can use the following command.
.br
> gpg [--homedir=/etc/lograptor/gpg] --import pubkey.gpg
.br
You can generate the pubkey.gpg file by running "gpg --export KEYID" on your
workstation, or you can use "gpg --search" to import the public keys from
the keyserver.
.TP
.B gpg_signers
To use the signing option, you will first need to generate a private key:
.br
> gpg [--homedir=/etc/lograptor/gpg] --gen-key
.br
Create a \fBsign-only RSA key\fR and leave the passphrase empty. You can then
use "gpg --export" to export the key you have generated and import it on the
workstation where you read mail.
.br
If gpg_signers is not set, the report will not be signed.

.SH "File Publisher"
.TP
.B method
Method must be set to "file" for this config to work as a file
publisher.
.TP
.B path
Where to place the directories with reports. A sensible location would
be in /var/www/html/lograptor. Note that the reports may contain
sensitive information, so make sure you place a .htaccess in that
directory and require a password, or limit by host.
.TP
.B dirmask, filemask
These are the masks to be used for the created directories and
files. For format values look at strftime documentation here:
http://www.python.org/doc/current/lib/module-time.html
.TP
.B save_rawlogs
Whether to save the raw logs in a file in the same directory as the report. 
The default is off, since you can easily look in the original log sources.
.TP
.B expire_in
A digit specifying the number of days after which the old directories
should be removed. Default is 7.
.TP
.B notify
Optionally send notifications to these email addresses when new
reports become available. Comment out if no notification is
desired. This is definitely redundant if you also use the mail
publisher.
.TP
.B pubroot
When generating a notification message, use this as publication root
to make a link. E.g.:
.br
.B pubroot = http://www.example.com/lograptor
.br
will make a link: http://www.example.com/lograptor/dirname/filename.html

.SH "COMMENTS"
Lines starting with "#" will be considered commented out.

.SH "AUTHORS"
.LP 
Davide Brunato <brunato@sissa.it>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP 
lograptor(8), lograptor-apps(5), lograptor-examples(5)

